# alle-jordens-planeter

## IO

Io (/ˈaɪ.oʊ/), or Jupiter I, is the innermost and second-smallest of the four Galilean moons of the planet Jupiter. Slightly larger than Earth's Moon, Io is the fourth-largest natural satellite in the Solar System, has the highest density of any natural satellite, the strongest surface gravity of any natural satellite, and the lowest amount of water by atomic ratio of any known astronomical object in the Solar System. It was discovered in 1610 by Galileo Galilei and named by him in 1614 after the mythological character Io, a priestess of Hera who became one of Zeus's lovers.

Mars' afstand til Solen veksler mellem 207 og 249 mio. km, med en gennemsnitsafstand på 1,5 au (228 mio. km) Diameteren er lidt over halvdelen af Jordens, mens massen kun er 0,107 jordmasser. Det giver en tyngdekraft på 38 % af Jordens.[36] Mars har en tynd atmosfære der primært består af kuldioxid. Dens overflade er fyldt med vulkaner (som eksempel Olympus Mons) og dybe kløfter (som eksempelvis Valles Marineris), der viser at geologisk aktivitet har foregået nyligt (2 mio. år). En stor del af overfladen har et tykt lag rødt støv som blandt andet indeholder meget jern hvilket giver Mars den røde farve.[37] Mars har to små måner (Phobos og Deimos), som menes at være asteroider, som er indfanget af Mars' gravitation.[38]


Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun. It is also known as the "Red Planet", because of its orange-red appearance.[22][23] Mars is a desert-like rocky planet with a tenuous carbon dioxide (CO2) atmosphere. At the average surface level the atmospheric pressure is a few thousandths of Earth's, atmospheric temperature ranges from −153 °C (−243 °F) to 20 °C (68 °F)[24] and cosmic radiation is high. Mars retains some water, in the ground as well as thinly in the atmosphere, forming cirrus clouds, frost, larger polar regions of permafrost and ice caps (with seasonal CO2 snow), but no liquid surface water. Its surface gravity is roughly a third of Earth's or double that of the Moon. It is half as wide as Earth or twice the Moon, with a diameter of 6,779 km (4,212 mi), and has a surface area the size of all the dry land of Earth.